SCIENCE UNDER THE ROMAN EMPIRE 15

Seneca provides in many respects an interesting contrast
to his contemporary Pliny. Ifinferior in character, Seneca
is the larger-minded of the two. His work is less typical
perhaps of the Roman attitude, but it is the more philo-
sophical and far more critical. Yet his Quaestiones naturales,
even more than the Naturalis historia of Pliny, is borrowed
material. The number of direct observations that it contains
is small. Seneca is distinctly less credulous than Pliny,
but just for this reason he fails to preserve SO much interest-
ing material. The chief importance of his work is that it
exhibits the attitude to nature of the more philosophical-
and, we would add, rhetorical- Romans of his day.

Seneca is a Stoic, but does not hesitate to criticize the
opinions of the school to which it is evident he is but loosely
attached. The subject of the Quaestiones naturales is a
general account of natural phenomena, but as such it is
ill arranged and imperfect. It deals chiefly with Astronomy
and Meteorology together with Physical Geography, ex-
hibiting a special interest in earthquakes and allied pheno-
mena. Seneca fell into that trap which had caught SO many
Greeks before him, the confusion of philosophy with
science. It was a habit of many ancient writers that they
would only consider phenomena in relation to their con-
ception of the world scheme as a whole. Even the medical
system of antiquity suffered from this tendency, though
Celsus assures us that it had been his master Hippocrates
himself € who first separated medicine from philosophy.'
Our author, who was called by Dante C Seneca morale,
was especially interested in Ethics, a moralist first and physi-
cist or scientist afterwards. Physics- - -which for him meant
a general description of the Universe-led to a knowledge of
man's destiny and through that to a consideration of man's

- Some moral significance, > he tells us, 6 should
duty.

be attached to all studies and all discussion. Whether we
seek into the secrets of nature or treat of divine things, the
soul must be delivered from its errors and from time to
time reassured."
