50 CREDULITIES PAST AND PRESENT.

Becket is the following : When passing through St. Omers
and Gravelines with some companions, as they were crossing a
river, one of them asked him as a favour to the hospitable
monks, who were about to receive them in their monastery,
66 ut in adventu tuo comedunt pinguia ") Becket replied that,
being Wednesday, this might not be a Forsan non abundant
piscibus," " said his companion. 6 Domini est providere, n re-
plied Becket ; and at the word a great bream leaped out of the
river into his lap.

Dr. Walsh, in his 66 Travels of Macarius," relates the follow-
ing miracle : 61 At the distance of a quarter of a mile from the
walls is Balukli, or the Church of Fishes. The church is SO
called from a legend that has rendered it very celebrated
among the Greeks. There stood on this place a small monas-
tery of Greek Calayers, when Mahomet laid siege to Constanti-
nople, who, it seems, were not molested by his army. On the
day of the decisive attack, a monk was frying some fish, when
news was suddenly brought to the convent that the Turks had
entered the town, through the breach in the walls. 'I would
as soon believe,' said he, € that these fried fish would spring
from the pan, and become again alive.' To reprove the in-
credulous monk, the fish did spring from the pan into a vessel of
water which stood near, and swam about as if they had never
been taken out of it In commemoration of this miracle, a
church was erected over the spot, containing a reservoir of
water, into which the fish, which still continued alive, were
placed. The 29th of April was appointed in the Greek
calendar as a festival to commemorate the circumstance ; and
a vast concourse of people used to assemble here on every
anniversary day to see the miraculous and everlasting fishes
swim about the reservoir."

It is recorded of St Pol de Léon, a saint of Brittany, that his
sister lived in a convent of nuns near his own monastery. It
was situated on the sea-shore, and exposed to the tempestuous
winds of the north. She represented the case of the convent to
her brother, when he ordered the sea to retire four thousand
