358 CREDULITIES PAST AND PRESENT.

"In the sardonyx stone engrave a quail, and put under its
feet a sea-tench, and put a little of the aforesaid confection
under the stone in the hollow of the ring, and no man shall see
you if you do anything in the house-no, not if you should take
anything away that is in the house.' 1l

BELIEF in birds presaging death is curiously noticed in
-

Howel's ca Familiar Letters 91 (July 3, 1632). Going
into a lapidary's shop to 41 treat with the master for a stone to
be put upon my father's tomb; and casting my eyes up and
down, I might spie a huge marble with a large inscription upon't,
which was thus, to my best remembrance : 'Here lies John
Oxenham, a goodly young man, in whose chamber, as he was
struggling with the pangs of death, a bird with a white breast
was seen fluttering about his bed and so vanish'd Here lies,
also, Mary Oxenham, the sister of the said John, who died the
next day, and the same apparition was seen in the room Here
lies, hard by, James Oxenham, the son of the said John, who
dyed a child in his cradle, a little after, and such a bird was
seen Auttering about his head a little before he expir'd, which
vanish'd afterwards.'

46 At the bottom of the stone there is: - Here lies Elizabeth

:
Oxenham, the mother of the said John, who died sixteen years
since, when such a bird with a white breast was seen about her
bed before her death.' To all these there be divers witnesses,
both squires and ladies, whose names are graven upon the
stone.' 1e

Iu the libraries of the British Museum, the Bodleian, and of Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, are copies ofa tract, entitled "A True Relation
of an Apparition in the Likenesse of a Bird with a White Breast, that
appeared hovering over the Death-bed of some of the Children of Mr.
James Oxenham, etc., 4to, London, 1641, with an illustrative frontispiece.' 91

In Dr. Mogridge's 46 Descriptive Sketch of Sidmouth 11 is a remarkable
statement of a similar appearance on the death of one of the family of
Oxenham, in that parish.

Dr. Plot, in a magnificent project ofa journey through England for the
advantage of "learning and trade," Slales, among other subjects to he
inquired into, "the bird with a white breast that haunts the family of
Oxenham, near Exeter, just before the death of any of that family."
