sociât à ses travaux militaires dans son gouvernement de Valen- The in-
ciennes, servant dans le Corps Royal du Génie. ,> At this time the fluence of

Madame
future dictator of taste seems to have hesitated as to whether he de Pom-
would not accept the position found for him by de Gribeauval, padour
and adopt the profession of a military engineer, but his father- and Démos- Jean-
who had probably good reason for SO doing- persuaded him to thène
come back to Paris and return to "la carrière des arts.' 31 This Dugourc.
decision Dugourc affirmed, in 1779, by the publication of a work
on the reformation of theatrical costume, which most certainly
had special interest for the Queen.

The marriage of his sister to Bellanger-chief architect to
Marie-Antoinette's favourite brother-in-law, the Count d'Artois-
probably contributed to bring about Dugourc's final decision, for
we find him sharing with Bellanger all the work executed on the
<4 bâtiments ,> of the Count d'Artois at Paris, Maisons, Saint-
Germain and Bagatelle. The decoration of Bagatelle established
his credit and position. The beautiful pompeian ornament,
between the bays of the windows and the fine treatment of the
ceiling add great interest and charm to the noble proportions of
the principal room. The Count de Provence-afterwards Louis
XVIII.-at once gave Dugourc a place in his Household; A en
1780," he says that he became <6 Dessinateur du Cabinet de Mon-
sieur," and he was also entrusted by him with the direction of the
magnificent cc fêtes et spectacles donnés à Brunoy pour la Reine et
le Roy."1

By this appointment Dugourc was brought into direct contact
with Gilles-Paul Cauvet,2 a consummate artist, who had dedicated
to Monsieur, in 1777, his <6 Recueil d'ornements à l'usage des
jeunes artistes qui se destinent à la décoration des bâtiments.' > 3
pour le transport des voitures, et surtout de l'artillerie, dont M. de Gribeauval, officier
en cette partie, avait fait faire des expériences."

1 The extravagant follies of Jean Paris-Monmartel had rendered Brunoy notorious.
They were ended only when the owner himself was "interdit et enfermé." The
Count de Provence bought the château, on which he expended great sums, but he
emigrated and a, ne retrouva plus à son retour d'exil, en 1814, ni les bâtiments, ni les
jardins de sa résidence princière 1 (see Barron,  Les Environs de Paris "). The title
of Marquis de Brunoy is said to have been conferred on the Duke of Wellington by
Louis XVIII.

2 1731-1788. The sale of his great collections took place March IIth, 1789.
Destailleurs, i L'Orementation des Appartements," > t. i., P. 89.

The address of the author is given as Grue de Sèves, prés celle du Bacq." On

a
the frontispiece is the following inscription: : 4 Recueil d'ornements, dédié â Monsieur
en l'année 1777, par G.-P. Cauvet, d'Aix en Provence, sculpteur de Son Altesse
royale." This work is described in the A Catalogue du Cabinet de M. Cauvet > as
containing 113 plates, making a volume of 72 leaves, but M. Destailleurs has never
seen a copy containing more than 96 plates on 68 leaves. Ibid.

75
