The existence of a second bureau similar in chara@ter-which,
Oeben,

Riesener, as it bears the date c6 1769," must have been begun long before
Gou-
the C bureau du roi > was completed-bears witness to the admira-
thière.

tion which that work inspired. This bureau is now at Hertford
House and can be compared with the copy of the 4 bureau du
roi >> in the same gallery. We notice at once that the marquetry
differs from that of the c6 bureau du roi." It is of à more forid
character; on the top figure instruments of music, doves, a cock
and open books, on the leaves of which are two not very legible
inscriptions. To the left is that which has been read by M. de
Champeaux as L'an mil sept cent soixante-neuf, le vingtième

Riesener fecit." To
février, furent pre perpetre à Paris, ce. I -
the right, on leaves turned in the opposite direction, a letter, which
begins c Monsieur, 3> continues thus: :-4 Die mir zum ofteren von
Ihnen erzeugten Liebes dienste, 3> a phrase which, like the frag-
mentary sentences by which it is followed, may be deciphered with
equal difficulty and disappointment. The only trace of interest in
the expressions of civility which conclude with the words, CG zu
ersuchen sie sich die Muhe geben haben, 13 is the evidence they
afford that the writer's German was as illiterate as his French.

The history of this bureau is involved in obscurity. Legend
has it that it was ordered for Stanislas Leczinski, but the initials
cC L. R.," plainly to be deciphered on the sides, cannot possibly
stand for anything but c Ludovicus Rex." Even if we admit that
it was begun for King Stanislas and, after his death in 1766, was
finished by order of his daughter, Marie-Leczinska, as suggested
by M. de Champeaux, we must remember that she only survived
her father two years, SO that the work must have been taken over
on account of the Crown before it was finally completed. On the
other hand, we have to reckon with its mysterious omission from
the list drawn up in 1767-when the Veuve Oeben married
Riesener-of all the goods finished and unfinished which were in
the <4 Magasin >> that she had inherited from her husband. It is,
however, certain that it once was in the c6 mobilier de la Couronne
de France; >> 2 that it was, as we shall see, sold in Holland with
other furniture from the same source, and that it was discovered
and bought by Sir Richard Wallace at Naples, whither it had
been taken by Sir William Hamilton.

Both the mechanism and shape of the bureau, which is some-
times called G6 bureau à cylindre >> and sometimes cc bureau à la

1 See the arguments adduced in favour of this supposition by M. de Champeaux
("Le Meuble," t. ii., pp. 218-220)and criticised by M. Molinier, pp. 155, 156.
2 Davillier, "La vente du mobilier de Versailles." G. B. A., 1876.

170
